Add Versioning details (#1648)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet: VERSIONING.md

# Versioning details

This follows the [OpenTelemetry versioning proposal](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/143/files)

OpenTelemetry .NET follows [SemVer V2](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html)
guidelines. This means that, for any packages released from this repo, all
public APIs will remain backward compatible, unless a major version bump occurs.
This applies to the API, SDK, as well as Exporters, Instrumentation etc. shipped
from this repo.

For example, users can take a dependency on 1.0.0 version of any package, with
the assurance that all future releases until 2.0.0 will be backward compatible.
Any method/function which are planned to be removed in 2.0, will be marked
[Obsolete](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.obsoleteattribute)
first.

## Pre-releases

> Pre-release packages are identified by identifies such as -Alpha, -Beta, -RC
> etc. There is no API guarantees in pre-releases. In general, an RC pre-release
> is more stable than a Beta release, which is more stable than an Alpha release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pre-release packages are denoted by appending identifiers such as
-Alpha, -Beta, -RC
etc. There are no API guarantees in pre-releases. In general, an RC pre-release
is more stable than a Beta release, which is more stable than an Alpha release.
```

### Public API change detection

For convenience, every project in this repo uses
[PublicApiAnalyzers](https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn-analyzers/tree/master/src/PublicApiAnalyzers)
and lists public API in the directory "publicAPI". Any changes to public API,
without corresponding changes here will result in build breaks - this helps
catch any unintended changes to public API from being shipped accidentally. This
also helps reviewers quickly understand if a given PR is making public API
changes. For example,
[this](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/tree/master/src/OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNetCore/.publicApi)
shows the public per target framework for the
`OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNetCore` package.

Since no stable version has been released so far, every API is listed in the
"Unshipped.txt" file. Once 1.0.0 is shipped, it'll be moved to "Shipped.txt"
file.

## Packaging

OpenTelemetry is structured around signals like Traces, Metrics, Logs, Baggage

> etc. OpenTelemetry .NET does not ship separate package per signal. There is a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
etc. OpenTelemetry .NET does not ship a separate package per signal. There is a
```

`OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNetCore` for ASP.NET Core instrumentation,
which produces Traces, Metrics and handles propagation, instead of separate
packages for traces and metrics.

## Experimental Signals

### Current approach

Given the fact that all signals are shipped as a single package, the following
approach is currently used to deal with experimental signals.

Any experimental signal which is shipped as part of a normal package will be
marked
[Obsolete](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.obsoleteattribute).
(Ideally we need an "Experimental" attribute, but .NET has only built-in support
for "Obsolete", so we are leveraging it. Using "Obsolete" code results in
compile time warnings to caution users.) This allows an experimental signal to
co-exist in the same package as other, non-experimental signals. For example,
the OpenTelemetry 1.0.0 package will consist of Traces and Metrics. As Metrics
signal is not ready for stable release, every method dealing with Metrics will
be marked "Obsolete". Once Metrics signal gets stable, it'll be added to a
release with minor version bump, say 1.2.0. The "Obsolete" Metric methods can be
removed with a major version bump.

> ### Alternate option

Reviewer: I'm not settled on this yet, but I'm beginning to warm up to this approach. My main concern was that early adopters of metrics will likely strive to stay current as metrics functionality evolves. As metrics becomes more and more stable, so will the application code they have written. I think it would be ideal that when metrics goes GA, early adopters would not then be required to switch their code to use a different package/namespace.

Two questions:
* If we initially shipped metrics in a `OpenTelemetry.Metrics.Experimental` package, could we simply use the `OpenTelemetry.Metrics` namespace?
* Perhaps the separate package approach + the use of the obsolete attribute would be beneficial? That is, the build warnings are a nice signal that you're using something at your own risk.

Author: Assuming we get metrics into own separate package,  yes agree we should use same namespace. The goal would be - early adopters who were using the experimental, will find it easy to migrate. The migration involves just removing the metric-experimental package, and upgrading the opentelemetry package to the one containing metrics, no code change. (Assuming they kept up-to-date with the experimental).

Author: If we are using separate package approach, then we can name it simply OpenTelemetry.API/SDK version 1.0.0-beta.1. The pre-release version already indicate its a unstable package, so additionally marking obsolete won't be necessary.

Reviewer 2: > If we initially shipped metrics in a OpenTelemetry.Metrics.Experimental package, could we simply use the OpenTelemetry.Metrics namespace for all public API?

If we go with separate packages, I'm all up for this (definitely making the users' lives easier).

Reviewer: > then we can name it simply OpenTelemetry.API/SDK version 1.0.0-beta.1.

You mean the same package name as we have today? That is `OpenTelemetry` and `OpenTelemetry.Api`?

Since we have already released version 1.0.0-rc1.1 this won't work because 1.0.0-rc1.1 > 1.0.0-beta.1 based on how semver and nuget handles things.

I envisioned that separate package would mean difference package name, so something like `OpenTelemetry.Metrics.Experimental` as you suggested.

Author: Yea you are right. I was trying to say - we can drop the word "Experimental" from the package name. Like OpenTelemetry.Metrics .9.0-alpha1 for instance? the pre-release alone is sufficient to indicate its not stable. right?

An alternate option to deal with experimental signal is to remove the signal
from the common packages, and ship as separate package. For example,
OpenTelemetry 1.0.0 will only contain Traces, and there will be a separate
package OpenTelemetry.Metrics.Experimental, which contains the metric signal.
Once the signal achieve stable quality, it'll be made part of the main package
and released as a minor version update. i.e OpenTelemetry 1.2.0 will contain
Traces and Metrics.

## Examples

Following shows an example on how the `OpenTelemetry` package versioning works:

`OpenTelemetry` 0.7.0-beta1 release : Pre-release, no API guarantees.

`OpenTelemetry` 1.0.0-RC1 release : Pre-release, no API guarantees, but more
stable than beta.

`OpenTelemetry` 1.0.0 release : Stable release consisting of Traces, Propagators
and Metrics. Metrics will be marked "Obsolete", to warn users that Metrics is
not Stable.

`OpenTelemetry` 1.0.1 release : Bug fixes.

`OpenTelemetry` 1.1.0 release : New features added.

> `OpenTelemetry` 1.2.0 release : Add metric support. This will be additive changes.

Reviewer: Would all the methods for metrics previously marked obsolete be removed? Or would that not happen until 2.0.0?

Author: Shouldn't we keep it until 2.0 ? So that, if someone took a dependency on it, they can still compile their code without issues when upgrading to 1.2.0.

Reviewer 2: > Or would that not happen until 2.0.0?

That's (more or less) the idea. In OpenTracing we used to remove Deprecated members right in the next release and, well, I remember quite a few complains :)

Reviewer: Hmm, yea I see how this may become tricky. If we see a desire to change the name or signatures of methods as we evolve things, then I think that would be mean we'd have to maintain all variations of these methods if we require that an upgrade to 1.2.0 must still compile fine.

Makes me more strongly favor the separate package approach.

[PublicApiAnalyzers](https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn-analyzers/tree/master/src/PublicApiAnalyzers)
and lists public API in the directory "publicAPI". Any changes to public API,
without corresponding changes here will result in build breaks - this helps
catch any unintended changes to public API from being shipped accidentally. This
also helps reviewers quickly understand if a given PR is making public API
changes. For example,
[this](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/tree/master/src/OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNetCore/.publicApi)
shows the public per target framework for the
`OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNetCore` package.

Since no stable version has been released so far, every API is listed in the
"Unshipped.txt" file. Once 1.0.0 is shipped, it'll be moved to "Shipped.txt"
file.

## Packaging

OpenTelemetry is structured around signals like Traces, Metrics, Logs, Baggage
etc. OpenTelemetry .NET does not ship separate packages per signal. There is a
single package which includes all the signals. i.e `OpenTelemetry.API` package
will consist of API components from *all* the signals. `OpenTelemetry` package

> will consist of SDK components from *all* the signals. Instrumentations also

Reviewer 2: Something interesting that was requested in Java, was the ability to offer a MicroMeter-based Metrics implementation, which would mean that each SDK signal portion would exist in its own package.

Author: I actually realized that there is some more clarifications required here. For SDK, its true that we have single package for traces and metrics. For API, its somewhat complex, as most of Tracing API is provided by `System.Diagnostics.DiagnosticSource` package, Context/Propagation is provided by `OpenTelemetry.API`. We do not know yet whether .NET team will use the `System.Diagnostics.DiagnosticSource` package itself for metrics, or a brand new package...

follow the same model - for example, There will be a single package
`OpenTelemetry.Instrumentation.AspNetCore` for ASP.NET Core instrumentation,
which produces Traces, Metrics and handles propagation, instead of separate
packages for traces and metrics.

## Experimental Signals

### Current approach

Given the fact that all signals are shipped as a single package, the following
approach is currently used to deal with experimental signals.

Any experimental signal which is shipped as part of a normal package will be
marked
[Obsolete](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.obsoleteattribute).
(Ideally we need an "Experimental" attribute, but .NET has only built-in support
for "Obsolete", so we are leveraging it. Using "Obsolete" code results in
compile time warnings to caution users.) This allows an experimental signal to
co-exist in the same package as other, non-experimental signals. For example,

> the OpenTelemetry 1.0.0 package will consist of Traces and Metrics. As Metrics

Reviewer 2: Logs will be included just as Metrics ("Deprecated"), correct?

Reviewer 2: Never mind - I talked to Cijo about this and how they are implemented differently for .Net ;)

signal is not ready for stable release, every method dealing with Metrics will
be marked "Obsolete". Once Metrics signal gets stable, it'll be added to a

> release with minor version bump, say 1.2.0. The "Obsolete" Metric methods can be

Reviewer 2: One tricky thing is that you may need two policies for `Deprecated` elements;

1) Ones using it as `Experimental` will have this attribute removed in the (near) future.
2) Ones that are effectively `Deprecated` and will be removed at some point in the (distant) future.

Reviewer 3: @cijothomas Thanks for taking the time to write this up! I think I'm leaning towards approach 2 for this reason @carlosalberto brings up above. I'm thinking it will be hard for users to know from `[Obsolete]` what is being removed and what is experimental. We could help with the text in the attribute, but I think having the experimental stuff in a pre-release package is more obvious and a better experience for users than combing through warnings. Also, NuGet does support deprecated packages (example [Microsoft.CodeAnalysis.FxCopAnalyzers](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.CodeAnalysis.FxCopAnalyzers) - notice the yellow warning, click for details) which we could possibly use when experimental stuff becomes official and is moved into main libraries?

Reviewer 4: I think using `[Obsolete]` attribute for experimental features could be confusing, and is probably against the common practice?

I would vote for using `[Obsolete]` only on things that we plan to remove in the next major release, *not* on things that we plan to introduce in the future.

removed with a major version bump.

### Alternate option

An alternate option to deal with experimental signal is to remove the signal
from the common packages, and ship as separate package. For example,
OpenTelemetry 1.0.0 will only contain Traces, and there will be a separate
package OpenTelemetry.Metrics.Experimental, which contains the metric signal.
Once the signal achieve stable quality, it'll be made part of the main package
and released as a minor version update. i.e OpenTelemetry 1.2.0 will contain
Traces and Metrics.

> ## Examples

Reviewer 2: Probably adding a section with examples using separate packages would be nice, to be able to put things into perspective for such approach.

specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/versioning-and-stability.md).

This repo follows [SemVer V2](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html) guidelines.
This means that, for any stable packages released from this repo, all public
APIs will remain [backward
compatible](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/master/docs/coding-guidelines/breaking-change-rules.md#breaking-change-rules),
unless a major version bump occurs. This applies to the API, SDK, as well as
Exporters, Instrumentation etc. shipped from this repo.

For example, users can take a dependency on 1.0.0 version of any package, with
the assurance that all future releases until 2.0.0 will be backward compatible.
Any method which is planned to be removed in 2.0, will be marked
[Obsolete](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.obsoleteattribute)
first.

## API and SDK compatibility

API packages are supported with any SDK version that has same MAJOR version and
equal or greater MINOR or PATCH version. For example, application/library that is instrumented
with OpenTelemetry.API 1.0, will be compatible with SDK version 1.0 or higher.

> 

Reviewer 4: nit: remove extra white lines.

Author: I have to update the contents of this section to clarify the tighter version requirement between api/sdk and sdk/exporters from this repo.

specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/versioning-and-stability.md).

This repo follows [SemVer V2](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html) guidelines.
This means that, for any stable packages released from this repo, all public
APIs will remain [backward
compatible](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/master/docs/coding-guidelines/breaking-change-rules.md#breaking-change-rules),
unless a major version bump occurs. This applies to the API, SDK, as well as
Exporters, Instrumentation etc. shipped from this repo.

For example, users can take a dependency on 1.0.0 version of any package, with
the assurance that all future releases until 2.0.0 will be backward compatible.
Any method which is planned to be removed in 2.0, will be marked
[Obsolete](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.obsoleteattribute)
first.

## API and SDK compatibility

API packages are supported with an SDK version that has same MAJOR version and
equal or greater MINOR or PATCH version. For example, application/library that
is instrumented with OpenTelemetry.API 1.1.0, will be compatible with SDK

> version 1.1.0 or higher.

Reviewer 4: SDK version [1.1.0, 2.0.0).

# Versioning details

This follows the [OpenTelemetry versioning proposal](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/143/files)

OpenTelemetry .NET follows [SemVer V2](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html)
guidelines. This means that, for any stable packages released from this repo,

> all public APIs will remain backward compatible, unless a major version bump

Reviewer 4: Consider adding a link to the [.NET breaking change rules](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/master/docs/coding-guidelines/breaking-change-rules.md#breaking-change-rules).

Note: This is the currently implemented approach.

Any experimental signal which is shipped as part of a normal package will be
marked
[Obsolete](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.obsoleteattribute).
(Ideally we need an "Experimental" attribute, but .NET has only built-in support
for "Obsolete", so we are leveraging it. Using "Obsolete" code results in
compile time warnings to caution users.) This allows an experimental signal to
co-exist in the same package as other, non-experimental signals. For example,
the OpenTelemetry 1.0.0 package will consist of Traces and Metrics. As Metrics
signal is not ready for stable release, every method dealing with Metrics will
be marked "Obsolete". Once Metrics signal gets stable, it'll be added to a
release with minor version bump, say 1.2.0. The "Obsolete" Metric methods can be
removed later with a major version bump.

### Example with Approach1

Following shows an example on how the `OpenTelemetry` package versioning works
with this approach:

`OpenTelemetry` 0.7.0-beta1 release : Pre-release, no API guarantees.

`OpenTelemetry` 1.0.0-RC1 release : Pre-release, no API guarantees, but more
stable than beta.

> `OpenTelemetry` 1.0.0 release : Stable release consisting of Traces, Propagators

Reviewer 4: There is a variation of Approach1 - ship 1.0.0 release by removing metrics entirely.

and Metrics. Metrics will be marked "Obsolete", to warn users that Metrics is
not Stable.

`OpenTelemetry` 1.0.1 release : Bug fixes.

`OpenTelemetry` 1.1.0 release : New features added.

`OpenTelemetry` 1.2.0 release : Add stable metric support. This will be additive
changes. Any existing Obsolete Metric code will continue to be present.

`OpenTelemetry` 1.3.0 release : More features.

`OpenTelemetry` 2.0.0 release : Remove all Obsolete methods from 1.* releases.

> ### Approach 2 - Separate package for experimental

Reviewer 2: Nice! Very good distilled!

An alternate option to deal with experimental signal is to remove the signal
from the common packages, and ship as separate package. For example,
OpenTelemetry 1.0.0 will only contain stable signals like Traces, Baggage,
Propagators. There will be a separate packages like OpenTelemetry.API.Metrics
and OpenTelemetry.Metrics, which contains the metric API and SDK respectively.
The packages can be released as pre-releases with no stability guarantees. Once
the signal achieve stable quality, it'll be made part of the main package and
released as a minor version update.

### Example with Approach2

Following shows an example on how the `OpenTelemetry` package versioning works
with this approach:

`OpenTelemetry` 0.7.0-beta1 release : Pre-release, no API guarantees.

`OpenTelemetry` 1.0.0-RC1 release : Pre-release, no API guarantees, but more
stable than beta.

`OpenTelemetry` 1.0.0 release : Stable release consisting of only stable signals - Traces, Propagators, Baggage.

> `OpenTelemetry.Metrics` 1.0.0-alpha release : Pre-release consisting of Metric SDK. Alpha indicates early stages of development.

Reviewer 4: I suspect if there will be a clean cut (e.g. `Sdk.CreateMeterProviderBuilder`). For example, some of the instrumentation libraries might need to have dependency on metrics part. We could end up with a situation where a stable version of instrumentation library needs some metrics functionality which is in the alpha package. And the workaround seems to be painful.

> # Versioning details

Reviewer 5: I vote for Option 3 with conditional compilation instead of branches

not Stable.

`OpenTelemetry` 1.0.1 release : Bug fixes.

`OpenTelemetry` 1.1.0 release : New features added.

`OpenTelemetry` 1.2.0 release : Add stable metric support. This will be additive
changes. Any existing Obsolete Metric code will continue to be present.

`OpenTelemetry` 1.3.0 release : More features.

`OpenTelemetry` 2.0.0 release : Remove all Obsolete methods from 1.* releases.

### Approach 2 - Separate package for experimental

An alternate option to deal with experimental signal is to remove the signal
from the common packages, and ship as separate package (i.e a package with a
different name.) For example, OpenTelemetry 1.0.0 will only contain stable
signals like Traces, Baggage, Propagators. There will be a separate packages
like OpenTelemetry.API.Metrics and OpenTelemetry.Metrics, which contains the
metric API and SDK respectively. The packages can be released as pre-releases
with no stability guarantees. Once the signal achieve stable quality, it'll be
made part of the main package and released as a minor version update.

### Downsides with Approach 2

The number of packages will explode over time. There is no option to delete a

> package from nuget.org, so the experimental packages will remain as orphan ones,

Reviewer: There are ways of reducing this confusion. Packages cannot be removed but they can be unlisted. The can also be marked deprecated with a pointer to the package that replaces it.

Author: ya its an option. (delisting is manual work in nuget.org)

contained in this package. (eg: new MeterProviderBuild().Build())

`OpenTelemetry` 1.0.1 release : Bug fixes.

`OpenTelemetry` 1.1.0 release : New features added. No metric code yet.

`OpenTelemetry.Metrics` 1.0.0-beta release : Metric evolves to beta status.
Still a pre-release.

`OpenTelemetry.Metrics` 1.0.0-RC release : Metric evolves to RC status. Still a
pre-release, but a final RC release will be done when Metrics is declared
stable.

`OpenTelemetry` 1.2.0 release : Add metric support. This will be additive
changes. Metrics entry point will be added the main package (just like Traces.)
(eg: Sdk.CreateMeterProviderBuilder().Build()) User who were previously using
the *final* RC package of `OpenTelemetry.Metrics`, will need to change the
Metric entry point code. Apart from that, they'll simply remove
`OpenTelemetry.Metrics` and update `OpenTelemetry` to 1.2.0, with no *other*
code changes.

In the case of `OpenTelemetry.API.Metrics` package, users will require code
changes, as the plan for Metrics API is to have it come from the .NET Runtime.

`OpenTelemetry` 1.3.0 release : More features.

`OpenTelemetry` 2.0.0 release : Remove any Obsolete methods from 1.* releases

> ### Approach 3 - Same package name, but version differently

Reviewer 5: this approach can also be implemented in a single branch with the conditional compilation. This approach doesn't have a requirement for constant synchronization.

Author: Don't see any big advantage for using conditional compilation as opposed to separate branch. But this is implementation detail, which I list in more detail (and we can discuss), once we get consensus on the approach.

So far I am seeing all of us preferring option3.

The approach keeps the same amount of packages, but release (multiple) versions
of the same, with experimental signals part of non-stable versions.

This involves managing more than one branch in Github - master for regular work,
and a separate experimental branch for experimental features. There can be 'n'
experimental branches, if there is a need. The immediate future will have

> metrics only as separate branch.

Reviewer 6: The instrumentations that want to depend on metrics would need to follow the same approach with a separate branch too, right? That seems ok!

Author: yea. Otel.inst.AspNet 1.0.0 (from master) will only instrument traces. The same package, version 1.5.0(from metrics branch) will add metrics support as well.

Release stable features as stable packages (OpenTelemetry 1.0.0, 1.1.0 etc.),
from master branch. Release experimental features as different versions of the
same package (OpenTelemetry 1.5.0-alpha.1), from experimental branch.

> ### Downsides with Approach 3

Reviewer: PRs may be come a bit more complicated in the event that there are changes that are desirable in both master and experimental branches. Though maybe this will be a good thing since it will promote smaller PRs 😄.

Author: could you add an example to better understand this part/

Reviewer: Good question. It's tough to come up with a concrete example, but this could potentially arise when working with any cross-cutting concern.

Here's a PR that may help #1428 - though admittedly may not be the best example.

In this PR a new feature was introduced to the propagation API. The PR also changes all the instrumentation projects to use this new feature.

My thought is that there may be some work required on a cross-cutting concern like propagation in order to enable some work on metrics. It may be desirable to follow a flow like this:

1. Do the work on the propagation API on the main branch.
2. Review, approve, merge the work.
3. Update the experimental branch from main.
4. Begin the work on the experimental branch that depends on the propagation API work.

I don't think this is terribly complicated, but it does require some additional overhead to decide how best to order and land the work.

Author: Thanks for clarifying more. Agree to the steps you mentioned. 
Step3 in your flow is something we need to do frequently to ensure metrics is bought up to date with master, as metrics branch contains not only metrics code, but the tracing/baggage code as well.

Reviewer 6: This makes sense to me too!

Using this example I wanted to bring up another situation. So far we're assuming that all metrics work is purely additive and the required cross-cutting work (step 1) can in fact be added to the main branch without breaking API/behavior.

Could a situation arise where that would not be the case? What if there was some public API refactoring we really wanted to do, because it would make experimental work a lot easier, or help make performance on the experimental work significantly better?

It is a purely hypothetical situation, and I can't think of a good specific example, but maybe something like https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/pull/1328, where we introduced BaseProcessor and BaseExporter?

"Approach 3" would still work nicely in this case (compared to "Approach 2", I think), although it would mean the experimental work is 2.0.0-alpha, instead of 1.5.0-alpha of course.

Again, just a theoretical example and probably unlikely to happen 😄. If it did come up though, would our approach be to still _not_ do the breaking change, release experimental as 1.5.0, but leave the refactoring as a separate thing for 2.0.0 later?

Author: > experimental work is 2.0.0-alpha, instead of 1.5.0-alpha of course.

From Otel spec about versioning, and in the context of metrics being the experimental feature - we should do 1.5.* only, and *not* 2.0.0. (Spec suggests 2.0 when we are ready to cut off features, not when we want to add something. So adding metrics must be a 1.xx release)
